# Gender-and-Ethnicity-Imbalances-in-Authorship-and-Citation-of-Tropical-Medicine

From its beginnings in the 1890s, the field of tropical disease research has evolved over more than 100 years. It was once a white-dominated field, once referred to as 'colonial medicine'. Today, it is a vital part of global health. Similar to other STEM (science, technology, engineering and maths) disciplines, tropical medicine is suspected of under-representing women and minorities (especially African authors) in authorship and citations. Using data from Web of Science, this paper aimed to assess the gender and ethnic composition of authorship and citations in tropical medicine. Using the methodology of a Nature paper on citation gap analysis in neuroscience and regression modelling, this paper quantified the citation gap for different gender categories and evaluated the impact of gender and ethnicity on total citations. Articles on tropical disease research published by the Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute (Swiss TPH) were also analyzed to check for gender and ethnic inequalities in authorship and citations. We found that women and African researchers were underrepresented in authorship and citation of scientific articles in tropical medicine. Papers with women as both first and last authors were under-cited by 10.2% (95% CI= (-11.2%, -9.1%)) in the discipline of tropical medicine as a whole and by 35.6% (95% CI= (-42.5%, -28.3%)) in Swiss TPH. Women as last authors would significantly reduce total citations by 6%, but female participation in research was not the negative factor affecting total citations. The participation of African authors as first or last author would not reduce the total number of citations but could significantly increase the total number of citations by 28%. This study is an initial assessment of the gender and ethnic imbalance in authorship and citations in tropical medicine. From the perspective of study outcome, we hope that this initial assessment will provide a basis for further analysis and raise awareness of academic equity for women and African authors, thus contributing to the work of cultivating a culture of diversity, equity and inclusion. From a methodological point of view, we propose to modify the ethnicity assignment algorithm by investigating African authors’ naming practice and to design a better regression model that includes variables related to study characteristics, which could show a more precise level of impact of gender and ethnicity.
